Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Ian James Kidd. He's
an associate professor at the Department of Philosophy at
the University of Nottingham and today we're talking about
philosophical misanthropy. So, Doctor Kidd, welcome to the show.
It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. Pleasure to be here. Looking forward
to our conversation.
OK, so let's start perhaps with the most basic
question here. So, what is philosophical misanthropy? And since
we are talking the uh philosophical take on misanthropy,
how does it differ from the way people commonly
talk about misanthropy?
Well, there's a distinction I want to draw between
philosophical and vernacular misanthropy. So in everyday vernacular language,
misanthropy means something like a hatred or a distrust
or contempt for human beings, maybe individuals or the
collectives. And I want to say that at best
is one extreme kind of misanthropy. So in the
philosophical sense, misanthropy is not defined as a set
of emotions. It's a judgment or a verdict on
the moral condition of human beings. Like any verdict
or judgment, it will express itself in certain emotions,
but misanthropy in its philosophical sense is a judgment.
It's a verdict based on evidence, reasons, arguments, assessments,
um, and I think there's quite a big difference
between the philosophical and the vernacular sense of misanthropy.
Because if you ask someone, are they a misanthrop,
they'll usually say, no, I don't, I don't hate
people. I don't feel contempt for human beings. Um,
AND that makes them think that misanthropy is, it's
not a position to endorse, whereas in the philosophical
sense, if you ask, do you think that humankind
collectively is morally pretty dreadful, I think more people
will be inclined to answer yes.
Right. And, and why would anyone be a misanthrope?
I mean, what are the reasons behind that?
Well, it, it varies a lot by the individual
misanthrope. I mean, some people describe themselves as natural
born misanthropes, and they'll claim that they've always had,
uh, some vague feeling that humankind is pretty dreadful,
that the human world is full of cruelty and
greed and injustice. Um, AND there might be such
people who've always had that pre-philosophical sense that our
moral condition as a species is pretty bad. Uh,
BUT the misanthropes I'm interested in, they usually come
to their misanthropy through a combination of. Um, EXPERIENCES
of their own, usually bad experiences, um, certain kinds
of reflection on humankind in our moral performance. Um,
THEY might have had what can't cause long, sad
experience of the ingratitude, injustice, and cruelty that seems
to infect the human world. Some of them might
have been inspired by certain arguments, including arguments given
by the philosophical misanthropes. Uh, FOR other people it
might be the inspiration of, of philosophical or religious
tradition, um, because I think many philosophies and religions
have misanthropic, um, components. And maybe for other people
it's, it's probably some combination of all of these
things. I mean, at least in my own case,
I wouldn't describe myself as a natural born misanthrope.
I remember being fairly sort of optimistic, uh, romantic,
philanthropic, wanting to think the best of people. But
in my case it was a combination of lots
of philosophical work on vices and wickedness and evil,
and then it was reading books about misanthropy by
modern philosophical misanthropes like David Cooper, uh, or David
Benatar. And then using those philosophical ideas to rethink
certain experiences and and learning to look at the
world again in a different way. And for me
that process was fairly quick. It took about a
year to become converted to misanthropy. For some people
it's much longer, for some people it's much slower.
And a lot of people also resist their misanthropy.
Um, THERE'S a great paper by um Catherine Norloch,
the Canadian philosopher. And she points out that many
people have misanthropic thoughts and ideas and feelings, but
they want to resist them. Maybe because they're not
persuaded by the arguments, maybe because they are um
slightly disturbed by the content of misanthropic ideas, or
they're aware that becoming a misanthrope would damage some
of their values or some aspects of their identity
that mattered to them. And I think there's, there's
quite a range of conversion processes that make a
person a misanthrope. But what's crucial for the philosophical
misanthrope is. At least a lot of that conversion
is done by reasons and arguments and evidence.
Mhm. Is there an emotional component to being a
mis a misanthrope? I mean, what kinds of emotions
do misanthropes experience toward humanity? I'm not saying that
even if there's that emotional component, it is necessarily
very relevant to philosophical misanthropy, but what could you
tell us about that?
Well, the, if you look at the testimonies of
misanthropes, that they always mention an extreme range of
emotions, um, and they usually emphasize pretty negative emotions.
So, for example, Kant and Schopenhauer talk about sadness,
woe, disappointment, frustration, uh, the Buddha mentions dispassion, disgust,
and anxiety, and, and I think these, these misanthropic
emotions, they appear in a misanthropic process of conversion
in different stages. So it's clear that many misanthropes
begin their journey of conversion through certain negative moral
emotions. They feel fear, um, at the, the evils
that human beings do. They feel grief and anxiety.
They feel worry and loss and disappointment, and those
emotions can help to motivate a person to start
thinking in misanthropic ways. But over time, as your
misanthropic verdict starts to sink in. Then I think
a further set of emotions comes in, because when
people come to a misanthropic judgment on humankind, they
often experience a further set of emotions. Anger is
often mentioned, distrust, uncertainty, sometimes shame at being part
of such a dreadful species, certain kinds of sadness
and regret at the, at the way that humankind
has developed. And one function of philosophical misanthropy, I
think, is to guide people through these emotional processes,
which can be very difficult and for some people
very traumatic. I mean, there's real moral disorientation in
becoming a misanthrope, and most misanthropes need good guidance
on how to manage and regulate these emotions. And
I think there can be sometimes positive emotions as
well. For example, certain misanthropes report a sense of
relief at finally seeing human beings for what they
are. Um, BUT it's pretty clear to me that
most misanthropes find it a very difficult emotional process,
becoming and being misanthropic, especially if you want to
sustain your misanthropy into the long term, then you
have to identify what kinds of negative emotions you're
susceptible to, develop ways of coping with them. And
that will usually involve some readjustment of your values,
your ideals, your expectations, your habits, your ways of
relating to other people. And that I think is
part of the difficulty of being a misanthrop. It's
emotionally turbulent for most people, and that requires real
management.
So give us some examples of what misanthrops consider
to be the failures or the moral failures of
humanity.
Well, I think there are for most misanthropes historically
and cross-culturally, I think that there are, there are
3 main routes into misanthropy. Um, THE first route
is reflecting on how human beings treat non-human animals,
and the failings people mention there include, uh, greed,
selfishness, malevolence, cruelty, brutality, exploitativeness, uh, willing to exercise
power over other creatures. Uh, A second way into
misanthropy is a reflection on how we relate to
and treat the natural world. So there are eco
misanthropes. Uh, THEY mention some of the same failings
like greed and destructiveness, but they also mention hubris,
mindlessness, recklessness, stupidity, short-sightedness. And then the third way
into misanthropy is reflection on how we treat other
human beings. And here the failings include greed, jealousy,
malevolence, selfishness, betrayal, treachery, insouciance, lack of care, callousness,
and one task for the philosophical misanthrop is to
look at these different routes into misanthropy. And then
try to map out the kinds of vices and
failings that are common to each path. So in
David Cooper's book Animals and Misanthropy, he identifies, I
think, 7 clusters of failings that people often display
in the ways that they think about animals, how
they treat animals, and so on. And you can
do a good bit of moral philosophy by taxonomizing
these failings. Now there is a lot of consistency
across different misanthropes. For example, everyone mentions greed, hatred,
stupidity, dogmatism, malevolence, selfishness. Uh SOME misanthropes also point
to different kinds of failings that other misanthropes don't
mention. For example, for some people, there are aesthetic
or spiritual failings as well, that should be part
of a condemnation of human beings. Uh, SOME misanthrops,
um, like to give very systematic lists. So if
you read the Buddha's discourses, he gives enormously elaborate
lists of the cankers, taints and defilements of human
beings, and they're systematized, numbered and analyzed in exhaustive
detail, whereas in other traditions they content themselves with
looser, less systematic lists. Um, SO if you look
at a, a recent misanthrope like Giacomo Leopardi, the
Italian misanthrope, he doesn't give a list of the
failings of humankind. He just gives examples um of
the failings of human beings and how they show
up in human life. So there's, there's no exhaustive
and definitive list. Um, ON my computer somewhere, I
have a list of the vices and failings that
Misanthrope's list. I think I stopped at 500. Um,
SOME of them have names like greed and cruelty.
Some of them don't have names at all yet.
Um, AND that's another task for a moral philosopher,
is trying to identify failings that we, we can
tune into but that we haven't described and also
trying to identify failings that are not yet studied
and analyzed. I call these esoteric failings, um, and
one contribution of philosophers has been to give us
vocabularies for thinking about these failings. Um, SO there's
no definitive list, and there is huge variation in
part because your condemnation of humankind will reflect your
sense of what the ideals and values of humankind
should be. And one of the reasons that misanthropes
disagree with one another, they disagree about what's wrong
with us, um. And that, that is one of
the reasons I think that philosophers should study misanthropy.
Even if you don't want to be a misanthrope,
I think it's a really useful way into doing
a kind of moral, social and political philosophy.
So when misanthropes pass moral judgment on humanity as
a whole, are they also doing it on individuals
or not?
No, I, I think one of the mistakes people
make about misanthropy is to think that it's a
judgment on individuals. So in the vernacular sense, misanthropy
is a hatred or distrust of individual human beings.
Uh, BUT, but I, I think that's a mistake.
Philosophical misanthropy is a verdict passed on something more
abstract and more collective, like humankind, human forms of
life, human existence. So this is the way that
David Cooper characterizes misanthropy. It's a judgment on. Something
broader and more collective, humankind, human forms of life,
the institutions, practices, structures, the systems of ambitions and
desires that have come to characterize human forms of
life. Now that is consistent with the misanthrope having
specific views on individuals. For example, there will be
certain individual human beings who stand out as exemplars
of our collective failings. You might, so you might
point to a certain person, maybe a political leader,
and say that, you know, they are a living
symbol of the greed, cruelty and indifference that characterizes
human life. So for the misanthrope, certain individuals are
exemplars of our collective failings. They are all that's
wrong with us, or all that's wrong with patriarchy,
or all that's wrong with capitalism in human form.
But likewise, there can be certain individuals who stand
out because they are exemplars of virtues. These people
will stand out as morally admirable because they are
relatively free of the failings of our collective forms
of life. But it's crucial for philosophical misanthropy. The
judgment is being passed on something abstract like human
forms of life or human existence. Now one complication
is. Does that include a judgment being passed on
human nature? Because in Western kinds of philosophical misanthropy,
it's been very common to include human nature as
part of a condemnation. Uh, FOR example, Bernard Williams,
uh, at one point remarks that Lutheranism is misanthropic
because of its conceptions of human nature as corrupted
by original sin. And I think that in some
traditions it will make sense to include human nature
if it's part of your way of thinking. But
if you look at, say, the philosophical misanthropies of
India and China. They don't pass judgment on human
nature at all. So you can have it, you
can have misanthropy without human nature. And I think
in part because misanthropic verdicts are consistent with either
a positive or a negative view of human nature.
You know, you might look at the the human
world as we know it and conclude that it's
suffused with cruelty, arrogance, dogmatism, and all these other
vices, but that's consistent with our being, um good
by nature, but also without being bad by nature.
I mean, it's perfectly possible that human beings could
by nature be disposed towards kindness, generosity and trust,
and the other other virtues. It's just that we
get socialized within a corrupting world that tends to
suppress our vices and draw out our failings. And
for this reason, at least in my own work,
I want to exclude human nature um from misanthropy.
The judgment is not being passed on human nature,
it's being passed on the collective structures and forms
of human life, and at least in some cases.
The concept of human nature becomes very problematic, either
because people understand that concept in very one-sided ways,
or they try to use it as a strategy
for undermining misanthropy by insisting that even if collectively
we're very bad, individually deep down, we are very,
very good. But that's irrelevant to misanthropy because the
question is not what are we like deep down,
it's what are we like in large scale collective
societies bound by institutions and practices. Um, WHAT we're
like deep down is irrelevant to that. So I
think that we should leave out human nature and
not focus on individuals. It's being a jud the
judgment is passed on the collective structures of human
forms of life.
OK, so that that's a very important clarification because
I mean, I was thinking that. Uh, MAYBE I'm
wrong, of course, but it could be the case
that I'm wrong. But it is, it seems to
me that most people, most of the time are
decent. I'm not saying that, uh, there's, there's not
any vices that all people tend to suffer a
little bit from. I mean, I guess that every
one of us suffers from at least a small
number of vices, but isn't it, uh, I mean,
when it comes to humanity's failures, isn't it mostly
a small number of individuals that tend to be
responsible for humanity's biggest, uh, failings or, or not?
I mean, what do you think about that?
Well, well I I think one advantage of using
the term failings is that. Uh, IT doesn't bring
to mind individuals in the ways that the term
vices does. So, you know, in David's work, he
says, I use the word failings because if you
say vices, people immediately think of individuals, which then
reinforces a misconception about misanthropy. Whereas I think we
do talk quite naturally of the failings of institutions
or societies. Um, SO failings, I think, is, is
the more useful term. And it will be the
case that there will be a dialectic between the
vices of individuals and. Failings of social institutions. You
know, for example, I take it, um, if you
think that certain kinds of capitalist economy are greedy,
exploitative, and destructive, well, those systems couldn't function without
people who had at least some individual version of
those failings. There has to be a dialectic between
the individuals and the collectives. I mean, if people
were genuinely incapable of greed, then you couldn't develop
greed economic systems, or so I assume. Um, BUT,
but to the claim that it's really a small
number of individuals who are causing all the trouble,
I think the misanthrop will be cautious about that,
because there are, there are two standard ways historically
that people have tried to push back against a
misanthropic verdict. One is to is to acknowledge the
reality of our failings, but confine them to unusually
awful people, uh, psychopaths, moral monsters, dictators, tyrants. The
other is to try to confine our failings only
to certain unusually awful conditions like uh civil war,
for example, or, or maybe conditions of poverty or
society collapse. Now, of course, the misanthrop can acknowledge,
there are some people and some groups who are
unusually awful and bear a special responsibility for the
worsening of human society. So if you're an ecom
misanthrope, you might point to uh the big fossil
fuel companies. You know, it's, it's not just that,
uh, carbon intensive economic systems are causing a huge
amount of environmental damage. We also know that they
engage in doubt mongering, and they, they have been
trying and succeeding to manipulate political and public understanding
of the relationship between fossil fuels and climate change.
And in his book, um, on environmental pessimism, Toby
Svoboda says, Um, this doubt mongering about climate change
is a genuine kind of evil because it causes
such enormous harm on an enormous scale. So the
misanthrop can acknowledge that certain failings are more intense
in certain groups, and they can also acknowledge that
certain failings are much worse in certain kinds of
hostile social conditions. Maybe people do become more selfish
and aggressive and violent under conditions of civil war.
However, the misanthrope will also emphasize that the failings
that they're interested in are not confined to awful
people in awful circumstances. They are, as David Cooper
says, entrenched and ubiquitous within the normal course of
human life, but often in ways that people don't
see. And I think one of the best examples
of this is to look at the work on
animal focused misanthropy. Now, if you look at the
sorts of failings mentioned by the animal centered misanthropes,
they emphasize that failings like greed, destructiveness, cruelty and
brutality, these are. Typically located in institutions and practices
like industrial animal agriculture, certain kinds of scientific and
medical experimentation on animals, the the institutionalized ways we
have of engaging with animals, that's where you locate
these failings. So of course there are greedy individual
people, people with the vice of greed, but greed
should also be located within modern systems of industrial
agriculture. And for that reason, the misanthrope says the
failings are much more continuous features of human life
than people think. But because they're located in systems
that we don't often think critically about or systems
that we are not informed about, we don't tend
to notice those failings. And you know, this is
why for the misanthrope, it's very, very important that
people should have a philosophical misanthropy that's based on
investigation and research. For example, there's a huge amount
of cruelty in industrial animal agriculture. But I take
it the majority of people just don't know about
it because those companies work hard to prevent you
from finding out what they do. And of course
most people don't really want to have detailed information
about how animals are treated in factory farms because
it's pretty terrible. Um, I mean recently I, I
had a discussion with someone who insisted that animal
agriculture in factories isn't cruel. And when I asked
him what he thinks about practices like debeking, he
quickly admitted he didn't know what that was, but.
Debeaking is a primary example of a cruel practice.
It is a practice which is premised upon cruel
treatment of animals, but if you don't know about
the practice, it's easy to think that it's less
cruel than it is. And so for the misanthrope,
these these vices and failings are much more distributed
in the human world than people think. They're more
common, more pervasive, and more entrenched. It's just that
people have certain epistemic habits that turn their attention,
their moral concern away from them.
So, just to clarify this point, what is then
the relationship between vices, corruption, and misanthropy?
Well, 11 relation is that, uh, vices for the
misanthrope are the terms of condemnation. So when they
condemn humankind as awful, dreadful, or a moral disaster,
what they're doing is arguing, um, to use David
Cooper's terms, that a whole variety of vices and
failings have come to be entrenched within the ways
that we live, think and feel. So if you
were to describe a range of human practices, structures,
ambitions, and so on. You would have to use
certain vices to describe them. Um, SO certain human
ambitions are hubristic, certain ways of thinking about animals
are, uh, insouciant. Many ways of treating animals are
cruel and brutal. And for the misanthrope then vices
are the terms of condemnation. What they are condemning
are the vices and failings built into human forms
of life. Now the connection to corruption is that
for the misanthroppe, these vices and failings aren't just
features of the system. They have a a sort
of toxic or poisoning effect upon people, because if
you are living and working within social systems that
are contaminated with vices, one consequence can be that
you yourself start to develop them. And that's the
technical sense um of corrupting that I want to
use. Something is corrupting if it tends to erode
your moral excellences and feed your moral failings. For
example, if you live within a system that is
premised upon cruel and brutal treatment of animals, then
that system will will persist if you yourself start
to acquire those traits. So a system is corrupting
when it's morally damaging, when living within that system
is itself a source of moral damage and injury.
And this is, this is a concept I'm taking
from Claudia Card's work. And the connection then to
misanthropy is for the misanthrope, the human world as
we know it is both vicious and corrupt, but
also corrupting, which is why misanthropes will describe the
human world as poisonous, toxic, uh, dangerous. It's, it's
polluted, as the Buddha says, the human world is
burning, burning, burning with the fires of greed, hate,
and delusion. And the function of these metaphors is
to emphasize that. If you continue to live within
a corrupting human world, you yourself will become corrupted
and morally damaged, which is why for some misanthropes,
the correct response to misanthropy is to withdraw from
mainstream human life. And these are the misanthropes that
can cause fugitives from mankind. These are the misanthropes
whose whose dominant emotion is fear, fear at being
corrupted. If they remain within a human world which
is poisonous and toxic, and so these misanthropes respond
by trying to withdraw from mainstream human life, maybe
to isolated religious communities, or they live off the
grid, or they try to separate themselves psychologically and
physically from the mainstream human world. They become hermits.
They live all alone. They withtreat and withdraw. Um,
SO that there's a deep connection between, I think,
vices, failings, corruption and misanthropy, because one of the
questions a misanthrop has to answer is, well, if
there are all these vices and failings, and they're
so dreadful, why have they persisted? Um, WHY don't
we do something about them? Why are they continuous
features of human life? And one answer is that
the human world has multiple systems of corruption which
entrench, reinforce, protect, and conceal the failings of our
world.
So, yes, and later, I'm going to ask you
more about the different kinds of attitudes that people
can have toward misanthropy and also the different types
of misanthropes out there. But do misanthropes include themselves
among the rest of humanity? I know that you've
already told us. Misanthropy is not really about passing
judgment on specific individuals, but more on humanity as
a whole and the systems, uh, humanity inhabits. But,
uh, do they include themselves among the, the rest
of humanity or do they position themselves as sort
of morally superior to the rest of us?
In my experience, most misanthropes will include themselves within
the within the terms of condemnation. So one particular
class of emotions that I think are very interesting
and misanthropy are certain kind of self-directed emotions. So
many misanthropes will feel guilt and shame and regret.
As they come to recognize that their moral failings
are continuous with the failings of the wider world,
uh, for some misanthropists, it's a kind of shame,
um, in coming to realize that your own failings,
um, are so entrenched, that you yourself are part
of a wider problem. So most misanthrops do include
themselves in the terms of condemnation, and for many
of them that that can be a motivation to
try to engage in certain kinds of practices of
moral repair and restoration. Now there are a minority
of misanthropes who do regard themselves as privileged and
superior. Um, FOR example, they will insist that they
are purified, they are, uh, too self-conscious, too wise,
um, and too self-disciplined to be corrupted by the
world, but they do tend to be an extreme
minority, and at least some of the misanthropes who
insist that they are, uh, morally superior, I think,
are clearly joking. Um, BUT most misanthropes will recognize
that. A consequence of their socialization in the world
is that they become corrupted, not, not irreversibly corrupted,
um, just that they have acquired the kinds of
moral damage you would expect by living within a
corrupting human world. And one place to look for
this is in the work on animal centered misanthropy.
So a common theme of lots of those misanthropes
is, you know, for example, for all of my
life, um, I, I was a carnist, I ate
animals. I didn't think about what happens to them
in laboratories. But then I, you know, I converted
to become a vegan or I became an animal
activist, and now I've tried to change my life.
I've changed the ways that I think and feel
about animals, and I've tried to improve my moral
practice. And insofar as I do this, I become
less guilty of the failings um of uh a
carnistic society. And I think that's probably the sensible
way to think about it. I mean, as you
said earlier, no one escapes having certain vices and
failings. That's part of the package of being a
human being. And the, I think the relevant moral
task is to try to identify your moral and
epistemic failings. And try to correct them as much
and as far as you can. Now for some
misanthropes, the only way to really purge yourself of
failings is to withdraw from the human world, and
they're the fugitives. But that's a radical option. For
many misanthropes, the sensible thing to do is to
remain within the human world, try as far as
you can to minimize your own vices and failings,
maybe identify your worst fight, vape vices and failings
and and focus on them. But also don't give
in to the idea that you could become a
morally perfected being who has no vices and failings.
You know, most human beings are not going to
be capable of that kind of moral self-perfection, and
there are probably vices like self-delusion and hubris in
even entertaining that ambition. I mean, I think the
aim for a misanthropy is to be better than
you were before, even if you could never attain
perfection.
Tell us about the difference between religious and secular
misanthropy and give us at least 11 example of
each of them.
OK. That's, that's a big topic and at the
moment, there's relatively little academic work exploring religion and
misanthropy. Uh, THERE are a few discussions of this
in the work of David Cooper, um, Catherine Norlock
has done some work on this. One problem is
that when people do discuss misanthropy in relation to
religion, they always mean, uh, the vernacular sense of
misanthropy is hatred of humankind. And naturally, pretty much
everyone in all the religions want to uh reject
that conception of misanthropy. I mean, for example, if
the core Christian virtues are, you know, compassion and
benevolence for your fellow people. You're not going to
endorse hatred of humankind. If you think that human
beings are created in God's image, you don't, we
won't want to hate human beings. Or if you're
a Buddhist and you think that compassion and loving
kindness are some of the core virtues, you won't
want to hate. So there's there's a big obstacle
to thinking about religion and misanthropy, which is the
extreme distorted, vernacular sense of misanthropy. Now there are
a couple of exceptions. Um, THERE have been a
couple of Christians who have described themselves as misanthropes.
Um, Soren Kiera Gore in some of his writings
has, uh, described himself as a kind of misanthrope.
But even when people don't use the word misanthropy,
I think you can give misanthropic readings of various
religions. Uh, FOR example, I think that, um, some
of the Christian tradition contains misanthropic elements. So if
you think about the tradition in Christianity that emphasized
that we are corrupted and depraved and that we
are contaminated by original sin. Such that various fightings
are inescapable. Well, I think there's a kind of
misanthropy there. It's a misanthropic conception of human nature,
and it might include, for example, Saint Augustine, it
might include Calvin as well. And the people in
that tradition might not like the word misanthropy, but
if you ask them, uh, Are these theologians endorsing
a picture of human beings according to which they
are systematically morally damaged in ways that generate vices
and failings? The answer might be yes. They just
use a different vocabulary of original sin or vices
and so on. So you can give a misanthropic
reconstruction of certain traditions. I mean, in my work,
I think the best example I've found is early
Buddhism. I mean, the Buddha doesn't use the word
misanthropy, and nothing like that word existed in ancient
India. But when you look at the ways that
the Buddha describes ordinary human forms of life, I
think he's clearly misanthropic. So when he describes the
existence of uh uninstructed worldlings like you and I,
basically unenlightened people, he says, uh, these people are
canquered, tainted and defiled with a whole array of
vices and failings, and in his suitass he lists
an enormous number of them, uh, greediness, laziness, selfishness,
distraction, anger, hatred, delusion, willful ignorance, and so on.
Um, YOU know, he described the human world as
burning, as poisonous. Um, HE said it's like, um,
you know, living within a conflagration. He says human
desires, ideas, ways of thinking, their views about the
world are dogmatic, deluded, cruel, and sensitive. And he
always says to his monks, you know, the sensible
thing to do is to withdraw from the world,
to go forth into homelessness. When the Buddha argues
that monastic life is morally superior, it's partly because
monastics don't live within a corrupting. Human world. In
fact, he describes the monastic community, the sanga, as
a refuge, a place of security away from mainstream
human life. Because for the Buddha, the idea is
that in a monastic life you live within highly
disciplined ways of living that are designed to remove
all the temptations and pressures and structures that feed
vices in ordinary forms of human life. So although
the Buddha doesn't use the word misanthropic. His vision
of human life is clearly misanthropic in the philosophical
sense. He issues a condemnation of human forms of
life. He identifies and catalogs an enormous range of
failings, and he describes how they are entrenched and
ubiquitous within unenlightened forms of human life. So I
think the Buddha is clearly misanthropic. Now I, I
know from experience that contemporary Buddhists really don't like
this idea. Because the image of Buddhism that predominates
in many Western societies is that Buddhism is optimistic,
philanthropic, positive, cheerful, optimistic. But I think you just
can't sustain that rosy image of Buddhism if you've
actually read the suitors, because if you look at
the discourses of the Buddha, they are overwhelmingly negative
in their characterizations of human life. So I think
the Buddha is misanthropic, even though he doesn't use
the M word.
Mhm. Uh, AND about uh secular misanthropy, I mean,
what would be an example of a secular approach
to it?
Oh, it's it's perfectly popular to be a secular
misanthrope. I mean, one difference would be that, uh,
your sense of the the range and kinds of
human failings will be different. For example, I imagine
a secular misanthroppe wouldn't include various spiritual or religious
failings, uh, like impiety or godlessness or certain failures
of humility. Um, BUT there could still be plenty
of vices and failings that would stand out for
a for a secular misanthrope, um. For example, uh,
it seems to me that many modern eco misanthropes
are largely secular but very misanthropic because, you know,
failings like destructiveness, selfishness, recklessness, stupidity, these aren't tied
to religious visions of the world. They're perfectly consistent
with various kinds of secular moral philosophies. Uh, FOR
example, uh, in a lot of animal misanthropy as
well, you know, the, the favorite vices include cruelty,
injustice, discrimination, abusiveness. And those aren't necessarily religious concepts.
And even where those concepts have religious forms, you
can dissociate the religious and the secular forms. In
fact, it seems to me that there's far more
misanthropy out there than people think, um, because it
involves such a diverse range of emotions and vices.
Mhm.
So in your work, I, you identify three different
kinds of attitudes toward misanthropy, namely optimism, pessimism, quietism.
Uh, COULD you tell us about each of them?
Yeah, so 11 question misanthropes always get is, um,
can you be a to be a misanthropist, you
have to be pessimistic as well. Now, they are
obviously related in various ways. For example, misanthropy and
pessimism in their philosophical senses are both judgments on,
on the human condition. I mean, for the misanthrope,
our collective moral condition is very bad, and for
the pessimist, our collective existential condition is very bad.
And there are lots of different interconnections between misanthropy
and pessimism. So in some recent work I've suggested
that for the pessimists, um, one of the things
that's really bad about human life is precisely our
moral failings. You know, it's when pessimists talk about
the, the disappointments, the regrets, the sufferings and the
miseries of human life, well, many of these are
caused or intensified by our moral failings. So it's
very easy for pessimism and misanthropy to be mutually
reinforcing. And you see this in Schopenhauer, the Buddha,
Leopardy, David Cooper and David Benatar. But I suppose
it is possible that you can separate misanthropy and
pessimism. Uh, FOR example, you might think that we
have a range of entrenched vices and failings, but
you might also think that these aren't fixed features
of human life. Uh, YOU know, maybe our society
has become contaminated by greed and hatred because we've
made a series of bad decisions in the past
about how to organize our societies. But if that's
right, maybe we can make better decisions and we
can slowly remove these failings from human life. So
you can be an optimistic misanthrope. You can acknowledge
that we have moral failings, but also insist that
we can translate them into moral successes by reorganizing
our societies. We can, we can engage in what
the pragmatists call meliarism. We can try to intelligently
identify collective ways to remove these vices and failings
from the structures of human life. And I think
there are plenty of optimistic misanthropes like that. Um,
AT the same time, I think there are plenty
of pessimistic misanthropes. So if you think that our
vices and failings flow, not from bad decisions, but
from deep structural features of the human condition, then
there's probably very little that we can do to
remove them. Um, THIS is the way that the
Buddha reasons, so the Buddha is a pessimistic misanthrope,
because for him, what really generates greed, hatred, delusion,
and the other failings is the inseparability from human
life of certain structures of craving and desire and
attachment. And he says these can't be removed from
human life, so as long as you live in
unenlightened forms of existence, you're stuck with those failings.
So there are different kinds of misanthropes. Some are
optimistic and some are pessimistic. Um, I mean, in
my work, the name I give to the optimistic
misanthropes is the activist. So the activist misanthrop acknowledges
the scale and complexity of our moral failings, but
they also insist there are things that we can
do about this. You know, we can engage in
collective projects of reform, educational, social, political, whereby we
try to reconstruct the human condition. For example, by
identifying the structural features that intensify our failings, or
by identifying the perverse incentives that feed abusiveness and
other failings and and reorganize the human world. So
there are activistic misanthropes, and I think many eco
misanthropes are also activistic. You know, they describe the
failings of the human world in relation to the
environment, but they also make more or less dramatic
proposals for restructuring the world. Now there are some
activists who who think that we should engage in
these projects, but also think that they will fail.
For example, Aldo Leopold, the American environmentalist. You know,
he's very misanthropic, I think, and he also says
that we should take action to try to repair
environmental damage, but he then very quickly says, ultimately,
ultimately it's impossible. Greed and destructiveness, the desire for
convenience and luxury are just too strong, but we
should resist them anyway. We should go down fighting
for the sake of our own moral self-respect. So
there are optimistic misanthropes, the activists, but there are
also activists who think that it's still doomed, but
we should go down fighting. Now the pessimistic misanthropes,
these would mainly include what I call fugitives and
quietists. So the fugitives are the ones who think
that the human, the failings of the human world
are too entrenched, they're too many, they're too powerful.
They can't be removed or corrected. We can't put
out the fires, as the Buddha says. So in
that case, what they do is they withdraw. They,
they try to escape from the human world, either
literally by living in isolated locations or in specialized
moral and religious communities or they become hermits, um,
or they try to psychologically withdraw from the human
world. Um, SO they are pessimistic. If you remain
within the human world, there is nothing you can
do to significantly or permanently reduce um the range
of our moral failings. For them, the best option
is if you can escape. The other kind of
pessimist is the quietest. So the quietest thinks the
human world is saturated with vices and failings. These
can't really be removed or corrected in any significant
way, but also the quietest thinks. We shouldn't try
to escape from the human world, because for all
of its dreadfulness, there are good things in the
human world. For example, if you value family relationships,
friendship, taking part in cultural and social activities, you
have to remain within the mainstream world. And so
the quietest decides to remain within a world that
they recognize as corrupting, but try to structure their
life to minimize their exposure to these corrupting forces.
So they live, they live quietistically. They try to
live within the world but keep their head down,
and they exercise virtues like carefulness, humility, diffidence, modesty,
and they try to carefully move through the human
world, which they might view as a kind of
assault course full of dangers and risks, but where
it's worth staying in that world for the sake
of the good things that are within it. So
there are lots of combinations between pessimism, activism and
optimism. And there can also be misanthropes who genuinely
don't know whether to be optimistic or pessimistic. I
mean, I think Catherine Norlock in her work, says
that she's in that position. She says experience has
taught me to be very pessimistic about the prospects
for serious positive social change. And yet at the
same time, I do see cases where we have
done good things, and I see cases where, where
good can be done and. She might also say,
I'm very wary of pessimism becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy.
So there are people who are unsure whether to
be optimists or pessimists, and these are people that
I'm, I will put in what I call the
the misanthropic predicament, where you are a misanthrope, but
you don't know what kind of misanthrope to be.
You can't choose a way of being a mis
a misanthrope because you haven't decided on how optimistic
or pessimistic to be. And there are probably a
lot of misanthropes in that position, because one of
the problem with pessimism, of course, is. It's partly
a claim about the future course of humankind, and
that's very difficult to justify. I mean, unless like
the Buddha, you have psychic powers and you can
see the future, how do you know whether the
world can be improved? The world sometimes might surprise
you. And I think a lot of, for a
lot of misanthropes, that's the problem that they have.
It's not, should I be a misanthrop or not.
For many of them, the evidence is overwhelming. The
question is what kind of misanthrope should I be?
That's the difficult question.
So when it comes to the types of misanthrops,
you told us about the activist, the fugitive, and
the quietist, but in your work, I think you
also identify 1/4 type that is the, the enemy,
right? So, what is that about?
So the enemy is the type of misanthrope that
most people think of when they think of misanthropy.
So the enemy of mankind, this is one of
Kant's terms, and he says that this kind of
misanthrop is animated by hatred, contempt, um, and negative
feelings towards humankind. They, they are the, the, the
hater of humankind. And for Kant, the enemy is
therefore disposed towards violence. Um, YOU know, they are
the ones who either want to. You know, literally
destroy humankind, tear it down, destroy it all. They're
the ones who talk about, um, wanting to bring
about the extinction of humankind, or they might engage
in more symbolic kinds of actions. For example, insulting
human beings, deriding human cultural achievements. So that's the
kind of misanthrope most people think of. It's, it's
the enemy of mankind. Um, BUT as Kant says,
this is a very extreme stance, and it's clearly
a morally vicious one. Because, you know, it's it's,
it's no fun to be an enemy misanthrop because
it's characterized by hatred, disgust and contempt. It encourages
distrust and alienation, and it often leads to practices
of violence. And for that reason, of course, I
don't want to endorse it. You know there are
very good criticisms of the enemy misanthrope, for instance,
by Lisa Gerber and Judas Sklar. One problem though
is that it's also true that there are lots
of enemy misanthropes. For example, if you look at
some of the radical eco misanthropes. It seems to
me they're clearly enemies, you know, so some of
the more radical and anarchistic environmental misanthropes, they'll talk
about, you know, tearing down the human world, unmaking
civilization. They're the ones who insist that it'd be
a good thing if we went extinct, if a
comet was to smash into the world and destroy
us, if COVID-19 had wiped out humankind, this would
all be for the best. So there are lots
of enemy misanthropes out there. But given the obvious
moral problems, I don't want to endorse it. Um,
IT might be the case that for many people,
they, they pass through an enemy stage in their
movement through misanthropy, but it'd be crucial for me
that they move through the enemy stage and that
they don't indulge it. I mean, it does seem
to me from the enemy misanthropes I've studied. That
being a misanthrope won't by itself make you an
enemy. There has to be other things at work
that would toxify your misanthropy and make it enemy
style. You know, so in the case of the
eco misanthropic enemies, it's a combination of their misanthropy,
um, their idealized images of the natural world as
pure and innocent. There's usually a background sense of
alienation from human people, um, certain kinds of extremist
political views, all of those things toxically together. Will
feed enemy style misanthropy. It's also worth noting with
the enemy stance, there are some people who call
themselves misanthropes when they're clearly not, they're something else.
So these are what I call false misanthropes. So
there was a group of these in the United
States in the 1980s, um, people who call themselves
misanthropes, and they said humankind is dreadful, humans are
destroying the natural world. However, the proposals they made
for dealing with this was first of all, to
cease all research and medical treatment of HIV and
AIDS, to reduce the human population and to stop
all um food and medical assistance to Africa. And
it seems to me that if you look at
their proposals, they're not misanthropes at all. They're homophobes
and racists because the rhetoric is humankind is dreadful,
but if you look at the people that they
want to hurt, it's very specific groups of human
beings. So these people are false misanthropes. They describe
themselves as misanthropes, but they're clearly not. They're using
it to describe different and much more problematic attitudes
towards humankind.
So when it comes to the activist misanthrop specifically,
or the more optimist kind of misanthrop, uh, earlier,
you told us that at least some kinds of
eco misanthropes can be activists as well, but there
are other kinds of activism, right, or other forms
of activism like transhumanism and anarcho-primitivism,
correct. Yes, so one thing to note about the
activist and the fugitive stances is they both have
radical variations. So in the standard case, the activist,
uh, misanthrop is someone who wants to. Dramatically transform
the human world, but they also want to ensure
it's still a world that contains human beings, whereas
the transhumanists, they want to radically transform the human
world, but if they're successful, there won't be human
beings in it. So these are radical activists, you
know, so for most of the transhumanists. Um, THE
creatures that should live in the world will be
posthuman creatures. They will be so transformed that they're
not recognizable anymore as human beings. They'll be, for
example, immortal, or they won't have permanent physical bodies.
They'll be morally perfect. They'll have elevated intellectual powers.
But the crucial point is they won't be human
beings anymore. And I describe that as radical activism
because it is misanthropic. It's based on a perception
that vices and failings are constitutive of human life.
The correct response is to take dramatic measures to
transform human beings, but into something else that that's
no longer human. So the transhumanists are radical activists.
Um, LIKEWISE, I would include some of the antenatalists
in that category because antenatalists like David Benatar are
usually misanthropic. Um, YOU know, human beings are cruel,
greedy, violent, selfish, and we are the cause of
all the world's moral problems. You know, no human
beings, no vices and failings. And of course, their,
their, their activist measure is something like um the
voluntary cessation of procreation, gradually, nonviolently bringing the human
population down to zero. Now I would count that
again as radical activism, because it's misanthropic and it's
activistic, but it doesn't honor the idea that the,
the, the improved world contains human beings. For the
transhumanist, there are no human beings, there are transhumans.
For the antenatalists, ideally. There are no human beings,
so they're radical activists. And again, they, they have
plenty of contemporary enthusiasts. There are lots of antenatalists
out there. Um, AND again, they might not use
the word misanthropic to describe themselves, but if you
look at their moral evaluations of humankind, they're clearly
misanthropic. And in my terms, they're activistic because their
main response is to undertake dramatic transformations of human
life. But if the dramatic transformations include getting rid
of human beings, then you're a radical activist.
Uh, HOW about the anarcho-primitivists?
Um, That's a good question, but I think I
don't know enough about narco primitivist, no. I mean,
I, I suppose if their aim is something like
the replacement of. The forms of large scale complex
social and political life with something far simpler, far
less complex, far less structured. That would be still
consistent with activist misanthropy, but it would be, it
will be leaning towards. It would be leaning towards
the radical kind, but they wouldn't count as as
radical activists because for me, what makes you a
radical activist is that your vision of the future
world is one in which there are no humans.
Right. OK, I understand. Uh, WHEN it comes to
the types of misanthrop, how about simply embracing the
evils of humanity? I mean, couldn't there also be
such a misanthropic stance?
That's interesting. I've I've encountered a couple of folks
on YouTube who are self-identified misanthropes who recommend something
like this for you. um. I think that's intriguing.
I mean, there, there are misanthropes I can think
of who I've seen in online discussion boards who
make something like this view. You know, they think,
look, if, if the misanthropes are right and these
vices and failings are part of the human condition,
then we should embrace them. Um, AND we should
kind of exalt in a kind of uh human
depravity. I mean, those people, I suppose, might be
closely related to the enemy misanthropes, um. And it
will be interesting to know what their justifications for
this is. Um, I mean they. I suppose they
could say that they're a kind of quietist because
if vices and failings are part of the human
condition, then embracing your vices and failings is a
way of embracing being a human being. And maybe
some misanthrops will say, well, actually, we shouldn't try
to get rid of our vices and failings because
they are part of the complexity and richness of
human life. I mean, in, in some writings, Nietzsche,
I think, voices attitudes like this, you know, when,
when he urges that we should radically rethink our
tables of the values um and reassess what we
think are the good and bad qualities of human
beings. Maybe he's thinking in that direction. Um, BUT
in this case, I'd have to, I'd have to
read more about these people and know what is
their, what is their motivation for doing this, and
how would they reconcile it with their misanthropy? Are
they just thinking if we can't get rid of
them, we might as well embrace them. If you
can't beat them, join them, or are they thinking
that there's, there is some other kind of value
to embracing human failings?
Mhm. Fair enough. So let me just ask you
one last question. And of course, I, I guess
that uh your answer would depend on, on what
kind of misanthrope you identify with, but uh how
do you think we can deal with humanity's malevolence
without losing hope?
Well, my, my own sympathies are, are very much
with quietest misanthropy. Um, I, I, I, I am
largely persuaded that, uh, the vices and failings of
misanthropes, that misanthropes identify, that they, they could never
be permanently removed from human life. I mean, it's
very sobering, for instance, if you read the Buddha's
catalogs of our vices and failings, which were written
2.5 1000 years ago in India. It's all they're
all perfectly familiar. None of them have gone extinct
in the last 2.5 millennia. Greed, cruelty, selfishness, lasciviousness,
distrust, and so on. It does seem historically that
these vices and failings are permanent features of human
life. Now, of course the. The vices and failings
we have can vary over time. They can be
more or less frequent, more or less intense, more
or less severe, and there might be certain ways
in which we could make some modifications to the
human world to at least reduce their intensity and
severity. Um, I mean, for example, Rousseau says that,
you know, maybe certain kinds of human failings have
become weaker over time, but new ones have come
to take their place. I mean, by analogy. Um,
CERTAIN diseases have been eradicated in the course of
history through vaccination campaigns, improvements in hygiene, and so
on. But many other, uh, kinds of diseases are,
are here to stay. They're permanent. And I suppose
the quietest misanthrope thinks something like that. We might
be able to minimize or reduce or limit certain
forms or expressions of our vices and failings, but
they really are here to stay. And. Whether, whether
that would be uh. A mess a message of
hopelessness, I don't know. I mean, certainly I don't
think there's, I don't think there's nothing that we
can do. Um, THERE are always small scale measures
we can take, and I suppose it might depend
for the, the misanthrope. Whether hope is to be
defined in terms of personal improvements in one's own
character, habit and lifestyle, or collective improvements, you know,
so I, I have at least some hope that
individual misanthroppes can make some improvement to their own
moral character. They can do a little bit of
good in the world. But the idea of large
scale improvement, I have much less hope there. But
one characteristic of the quietest is that they focus
upon. Um, INDIVIDUAL self cultivation and small modest local
acts of goodness. For example, maybe you recognize I
can't reduce the failings of humankind as a whole,
that's beyond my moral powers, but I can try
to be a better person myself. I can try
to raise my children to be good, virtuous people,
and I can try to improve the lives and
maybe the moral characters of some of the people
in my local world. So you have a very
small scale modest sense of what you can do.
So maybe the question of hope depends upon the
scale of your ambitions. Because one problem with the
activist misanthropes is they set their moral ambitions at
a very high level. You know, the improvement of
the human condition, the abolition of greed, the extinction
of hatred. But if your moral ambitions are enormous,
then as the Buddha would warn you, you're setting
yourself up for frustration and disappointment because for the
Buddha, suffering is partly measured by the gap between
your desires and ambitions, um, and, and the realities
of the world, which I think is a good
reason to be a quietist. I mean, the quietest
doesn't give up on moral action. They are committed
to the moral project, but they do so on
a small, modest local scale. And I think that
if you're a quietest misanthrope and you carefully manage
your hopes, you can maintain a kind of hope
because your hopes are careful, modest and sensible. And
the the question would be is that hope enough
for the misanthrope?
OK, so just before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find your work
on the internet?
Yes, if you, uh, if you Google Ian Kidd
philosophy, you'll find my website. There's a page on
misanthropy and pessimism there. Um, THERE are some academic
essays, there are some popular public essays, um, and
also if you Google Ian Kidd misanthropy and YouTube,
you can find various talks of mine. Um, ALL
folks are very welcome to find my email address
online and get in touch. Uh, I'm always happy,
in particular, to hear from misanthropes, uh, who want
to tell me about their, their own experiences and,
and conversions. Um, THAT'S always very valuable to me.
Great. So, Doctor Keith, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a real pleasure to talk with you.
You too, Ricardo, thanks for uh philosophizing with me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor, Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.